Evaluate the feasibility of using Minecraft style proc gen with modular predictable seeding + I build cameras in the scene that match snapshot views to text descriptions to train an llm to regenerate diverse array of scenes accurately from seeds / modifying proc gen functions and shader effects

Short answer: yes—this is very feasible if you own the generator. Deterministic, Minecraft-style proc-gen with fixed seeds gives you perfect, cheap labels (the seed, function graph, and every parameter). If you instrument the engine to log cameras + render passes, you can supervise an LLM (or a small code-LLM) to (a) recover seeds/params from text or images and (b) author controlled variations (“same seed, higher ridge amplitude, swap palette to tundra”). The main difficulty isn’t technology—it’s designing the right mid-level interface between language and your low-level noise/shader parameters so the mapping is learnable and predictable.

Here’s a concrete plan and what to watch out for.

1) Representation: make the problem learnable

Do not map prose directly to raw floats. Introduce a small, human-named schema that sits between text and the engine:

High-level slots (categorical): biome, palette, terrain archetype (island, archipelago, mesa), feature counts (villages, rivers, caves), material set, time-of-day/weather.

Mid-level knobs (bounded, quantized): elevation variance, ridge frequency, domain-warp strength, cave density, tree density, river width, erosion passes, chunk size, LOD policy.

Low-level (engine-specific, optional): per-noise octave counts, lacunarity, gain, FBM type, shader toggle flags.

Use discrete bins (e.g., 8–32 buckets) for continuous params. LLMs are much better at choosing from named buckets than emitting precise floats.

Define a tiny scene DSL that is 100% deterministic: 


World(
  seed=742193,
  biome="taiga",
  palette="cold_blue",
  terrain="ridged_islands",
  knobs={
    "elevation_var": "high",
    "ridge_freq": "med",
    "warp_strength": "low",
    "river_count": 3,
    "tree_density": "high",
    "cave_density": "low"
  },
  shaders=["snowcap", "specular_water:v2"],
  cameras=[
    Cam(id="A", pose=SE3(...), fov=70, tag="coastline_overlook"),
    Cam(id="B", pose=SE3(...), fov=50, tag="river_delta_close")
  ]
)


Your renderer consumes only this DSL + seed to produce the same world every time.

2) Data factory: generate perfect supervision

Because everything is synthetic, you can label everything for free.

For each sampled DSL:

Render multi-view images per camera (RGB) and save intrinsics/extrinsics, plus depth/normal/segmentation (fast to add in a voxel/Minecraft-like renderer).

Emit the exact DSL and a structured caption (template + a bit of variability) describing visible attributes in each view:

Global: biome, palette, macro landforms, weather/time.

Local per camera: visible features (river on left, cliffs, pine density), approximate counts, materials.

Store: {seed, DSL json, camera list, per-view renders + passes, per-view caption, global caption}.

This gives you multiple supervised tasks from the same sample:

Text → DSL (categorical + discrete regressions).

Text → seed (either predict seed bits or predict a latent that deterministically maps to seed; see §4).

Text → code (program synthesis of the DSL).

Image ↔ text contrastive (CLIP-like) on your domain to tighten semantics.

Image/Depth → DSL (inverse graphics baseline).

3) Cameras: make snapshot alignment robust

You said you’ll “build cameras in the scene.” Great—treat cameras as first-class:

Predefine semantic camera tags per archetype (e.g., “coastline_overlook”, “valley_floor”, “mesa_top”). Log FOV, pose, near/far, and a framing mask (rough rule-of-thirds placement for major features) so you can generate captions grounded in where things are (“river enters frame at lower-left”).

Ensure coverage: at least 4–8 canonical views per world template. Add a stochastic explorer that picks extra poses along feature lines (river splines, ridge crests) to increase variety without breaking determinism.

Save all camera metadata; later, at inference, the LLM can emit both DSL and a requested camera tag.

4) What to predict exactly (three viable routes)

A. Code-gen the DSL (recommended first).
Train a small code-LLM (8–14B works well) on (caption -> DSL text) with function calls and named enums. Determinism comes “for free” because seeds and choices are explicit tokens. Use constrained decoding (JSON schema / grammar) to avoid invalid programs.

B. Predict a param vector (+ seed) with a classifier head.
Model outputs categorical logits for each slot, plus binned regressions for knobs. For the seed:

Option 1: let the model emit the seed int (as a sequence of hex tokens). Works surprisingly well if you also add a verification loss (see below).

Option 2: predict a latent z, then derive seed = hash(z, prompt). This yields deterministic but not necessarily original seeds. Useful when you only need consistent reproduction, not exact seed recovery.

C. Two-stage: text → mid-level sketch → proc-param diffusion.
First map text to a compact attribute sketch; then run a tiny diffusion/flow in parameter space (not images) to sample diverse consistent worlds. Much cheaper than pixel diffusion; perfect when you want “same description, 5 varied seeds.”

5) Losses & training tricks that matter

Multi-task: joint loss over categorical slots, binned knobs, and code tokens if you train both A & B (shared encoder, task-specific heads).

Render verification (cycle loss): given predicted DSL, re-render a thumbnail (64–128px) and compute LPIPS/SSIM vs the source view(s). Backprop only through the encoder (don’t need differentiable rasterizer; just use the verification score as a scalar auxiliary loss). This crushes degenerate solutions and teaches the model that the tokens must “look right.”

Contrastive alignment: train a small domain-CLIP on (render, caption) pairs so textual attributes bind tightly to visual signals from your engine.

Curriculum: start with a restricted palette of biomes/knobs, then unlock more enums/bins. The mapping becomes far easier.

6) Evaluation (be strict, it keeps the loop honest)

Exact reproducibility rate: percentage where re-render of predicted DSL + seed matches source within tight LPIPS/SSIM.

Attribute accuracy: F1 on biome/terrain/features, ±1-bin tolerance for knobs.

Camera correctness: correct tag + FOV within tolerance; pose repro with angle/position thresholds.

Diversity at fixed prompt: intra-set variance across 5–10 samples with controlled seed randomness.

Edit success: given “same seed, +20% ridge, swap to tundra,” measure deltas in the correct direction on rendered proxies.

7) Minimal viable prototype (straightforward)

Engine hooks (Godot/Unity/your voxel engine):

Deterministic seed plumbing for every noise/function.

Single entry World(seed, biome, knobs, shaders, cameras) → renders + passes.

Headless batch mode.

Schema + DSL with JSON grammar + enums and 8–16 bins per continuous knob.

Data: generate ~50k worlds × 6 views (300k images) with captions. Store seeds, DSL, cameras, passes.

Model A (code-gen): a small instruction-tuned LLM with grammar-constrained decoding to emit DSL. Start with text-only; add image encoder later for inverse tasks.

Verifier: thumbnail re-render + LPIPS/SSIM used as an auxiliary consistency score during training (no need to backprop through renderer).

Inference API:

describe -> DSL → render (deterministic).

edit(DSL, edits) (delta prompts) → new DSL (same seed unless asked to change).

variants(DSL, k) → sample parameter-space diffusion/flow for diversity while preserving high-level slots.

8) Feasibility & risks (and mitigations)

One-to-many mapping (many seeds fit the same caption).
Mitigate by training the model to emit a valid DSL (not necessarily the original), and judge by render-similarity + attribute correctness rather than exact seed recovery. If exact recovery matters, include seed tokens during training and increase caption specificity with auto-generated numeric hints (“two narrow rivers, high cliffs”).

Number handling (LLMs and floats).
Use enums/bins and grammar-constrained decoding. For freeform numbers (e.g., “200m cliffs”), project to bins via a learned mapper.

Over-coupling to your renderer’s quirks.
Add light augmentations and alternative shader variants so the model generalizes across minor renderer changes.

Camera ambiguity.
Use named camera tags in captions and supervise the tag prediction explicitly; for freeform camera text at inference, map to nearest tag.

9) Stretch goals (big wins for little cost)

Bidirectional mapping (inverse graphics): train an encoder from a single render (RGB+depth) → DSL. Great for “edit this screenshot as text.”

Program synthesis with tools: let the LLM call library functions (add_river(count=2, width=“narrow”)) and check with the verifier loop; retry until score passes a threshold (tool-calling RL / rejection sampling).

Parameter-space diffusion: 64–256-dim latent over your knobs, trained with rectified flow; text conditions through cross-attention from a small text encoder. Ultra-cheap sampling and diverse outputs.

Verdict

High feasibility and high leverage. Because you control seeding and the proc-gen graph, you can build a perfectly labeled synthetic dataset, a deterministic DSL, and a fast verification loop. Train a small grammar-constrained code-LLM (text → DSL) plus a thumbnail verifier, and you’ll already be able to regenerate scenes exactly from seeds and make precise, text-driven edits to proc-gen/shader knobs. From there, add parameter-space diffusion for diversity and an inverse encoder for “edit from image.”
